```rst
PEP: 790
Title: New methods for easier handling of ExceptionGroups
Author: Zac Hatfield-Dodds <zac@zhd.dev>
Sponsor: Gregory P. Smith <greg@krypto.org>
Discussions-To: TBD
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 24-March-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History:

Abstract
========

As :pep:`654` :class:`ExceptionGroup` has come into widespread use across the
Python community, some common but awkward patterns have emerged.  We therefore
propose adding new methods to exception objects:

- ``BaseExceptionGroup.flat_exceptions()``, returning the 'leaf' exceptions as
  a list, with each traceback composited from any intermediate groups.

- ``with BaseException.preserve_context() [as exc]:``, a context manager which
  saves and restores the ``__context__`` and ``__suppress_context__``
  attributes, to raise an exception unchanged within an ``except:`` block.

- ``BaseException.as_group()``, returning ``self`` for exception groups or
  ``BaseException("", [self])`` for all other exceptions.

We expect this to enable more concise expression of error handling logic in
many medium-complexity cases.  Without them, exception-group handlers will
continue to discard intermediate tracebacks and mis-handle ``__context__``
exceptions, to the detriment of anyone debugging async code.


Motivation
==========

1. often want to get the leaf exceptions
    - most often, looking to re-raise a single exception which matches some
      condition or is first in a priority ordering.
    - there are very very many flatten() implementations out there - and
      as far as I can tell, every single one drops most of the traceback!
    - IMO there's a clear interest in making it easy to do the right thing,
      and a method is the best way to make that universally-accessible.

2. raising an existing exception inside an ``except`` or ``except*`` clause
   replaces the ``__context__`` with that of the current exception.
    - this is newly a problem, because raising a previously-created exception
      was much rarer before ``ExceptionGroup``.
    - discarding the previous context and suppression state is not _that_
      big a deal, though suboptimal
    - but attaching the group as context, when the user specifically tried
      to avoid that, is a real pain point.  tracebacks of >10k lines become
      common, and tracebacks of several hundred thousand have been seen in
      production apps
      cf https://github.com/python-trio/trio/issues/2001
    - possible to try/finally our way out of this, but it's quite verbose.
      helper functions are unsatisfying and harder to discover; no clear
      location to put one.  therefore, we suggest making this a method.

3. surprisingly common to be handling "an exception, maybe in a group"
    - sometimes have good reasons not to ``except*``
        - e.g. context manager which shouldn't change the propagating error,
          but wants to do something (e.g. log) if it matches a condition
        - or the exception object was sent through a queue, over RPC, etc.
        - or it's coming from upstream code you don't control
    - having an easy "as a group" primitive reduces duplication, and nudges
      users towards handling the could-be-a-group case.
    - similarly, could be a helper function but unclear where to put that +
      we think the discoverability will be v. valuable.




code sample::

    # unfortunate code duplication
    if isinstance(err, BaseExceptionGroup):
        not_found = err.subgroup(lambda e: isinstance(e, HTTPError) and e.status_code == 404) is not None
    else:
        not_found = isinstance(err, HTTPError) and err.status_code == 404

    # work out tweaks to the above so we can then:

    # whoops, replaces previous context (if any) with the group!
    raise exc








Specification
=============

Adding ``BaseExceptionGroup.flat_exceptions()``
-----------------------------------------------

A new method ``flat_exceptions()`` will be added to ``BaseExceptionGroup``, with the
following signature:

.. code-block:: python

    def flat_exceptions(self) -> list[BaseException]:
        """
        Return a flat list of all 'leaf' exceptions.

        If the exception is not a ``BaseExceptionGroup``, return ``[eg]``.
        Otherwise, each leaf exception is shallow-copied, with a full
        traceback composed from those of each all containing groups.
        """

.. raw:: html

   <details>
   <summary>Example implementation as a Python function</summary>

The following Python function is provided for illustration.  Backports
such as the ``exceptiongroup`` library, or project-internal helper modules,
may wish to use it until they are able to upgrade to a Python version
which includes the new method.

.. code-block:: python

    import copy
    import types
    from types import TracebackType


    def flat_exceptions(eg: BaseException) -> list[BaseException]:
        """
        Return a flat list of all 'leaf' exceptions.

        If the exception is not a ``BaseExceptionGroup``, return ``[eg]``.
        Otherwise, each leaf exception is shallow-copied, with a full
        traceback composed from those of each all containing groups.
        """
        if not isinstance(eg, BaseExceptionGroup):
            return [eg]

        result: list[BaseException] = []

        def _flatten(group: BaseExceptionGroup, parent_tb: TracebackType | None = None):
            group_tb = group.__traceback__
            combined_tb = _combine_tracebacks(parent_tb, group_tb)
            for exc in group.exceptions:
                if isinstance(exc, BaseExceptionGroup):
                    _flatten(exc, combined_tb)
                else:
                    tb = _combine_tracebacks(combined_tb, exc.__traceback__)
                    result.append(copy.copy(exc).with_traceback(tb))

        _flatten(eg)
        return result


    def _combine_tracebacks(
        tb1: TracebackType | None,
        tb2: TracebackType | None,
    ) -> TracebackType | None:
        """
        Combine two tracebacks, putting tb1 frames before tb2 frames.

        If either is None, return the other.
        """
        if tb1 is None:
            return tb2
        if tb2 is None:
            return tb1

        # Convert tb1 to a list of frames
        frames = []
        current = tb1
        while current is not None:
            frames.append((current.tb_frame, current.tb_lasti, current.tb_lineno))
            current = current.tb_next

        # Create a new traceback starting with tb2
        new_tb = tb2

        # Add frames from tb1 to the beginning (in reverse order)
        for frame, lasti, lineno in reversed(frames):
            new_tb = types.TracebackType(
                tb_next=new_tb, tb_frame=frame, tb_lasti=lasti, tb_lineno=lineno
            )

        return new_tb


.. raw:: html

   </details>


Adding ``BaseException.preserve_context()``
-------------------------------------------

A new method ``preserve_context()`` will be added to ``BaseException``, with the
following signature:

.. code-block:: python

    def preserve_context(self) -> contextlib.AbstractContextManager[Self]:
        """
        Context manager that preserves the exception's __context__ and 
        __suppress_context__ attributes.
        
        When entering the context, the current values of __context__ and 
        __suppress_context__ are saved. When exiting, these saved values are 
        restored to the exception. This allows raising an exception inside 
        an except block without changing its context chain.
        """

Usage example:

.. code-block:: python

    # We're an async web framework, where user code can raise an HTTPException 
    # to return a particular HTTP error code to the client.  However, it may
    # (or may not) be raised inside a TaskGroup, so we need to use `except*`;
    # and if there are *multiple* such exceptions we'll treat that as a bug.
    try:
        user_code_here()
    except* HTTPException as group:
        first, *rest = group.flat_exceptions()
        if rest:
            raise  # handled by internal-server-error middleware
        ...  # logging, cache updates, etc.
        with first.preserve_context():
            raise first

Without ``.preserve_context()``, this could would have to either:

* arrange for the exception to be raised *after* the ``except*`` block,
  making code difficult to follow in nontrivial cases, or 
* discard the existing ``__context__`` of the ``first`` exception, replacing 
  it with an ``ExceptionGroup`` which is simply an implementation detail, or 
* use ``try/except`` instead of ``except*``, handling  the possiblity that
  the group doesn't contain an ``HTTPException`` at all,[#catch-raw-group] or
* implement the semantics of ``.preserve_context()`` inline::

    ctx_state = first.__context__, first.__suppress_context__
    try:
        raise first
    finally:
        first.__context__, first.__suppress_context__ = ctx_state

  which is not *literally unheard-of*, but remains very very rare.


.. raw:: html

   <details>
   <summary>Example implementation as a Python class</summary>

.. code-block:: python

    class preserve_context:
        def __init__(self, exc: BaseException):
            self.__exc = exc
            self.__context = exc.__context__
            self.__suppress_context = exc.__suppress_context__
            # Don't modify the __cause__ attribute (so user can `raise a from b`),
            # and don't modify the traceback (so user can see the `raise ...`).

        def __enter__(self):
            return self.__exc

        def __exit__(self, exc_type, exc_value, traceback):
            assert exc_value is self.__exc, f"did not raise the expected exception {self.__exc!r}"
            exc_value.__context__ = self.__context
            exc_value.__suppress_context__ = self.__suppress_context


.. raw:: html

   </details>


Adding ``BaseException.as_group()``
-----------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    def as_group(self):
        if isinstance(self, BaseExceptionGroup):
            return self
        return BaseExceptionGroup("", [self])

.. note::

    Perhaps we should just recommend that people do:

    .. code-block:: python

        if not isinstance(exc, BaseExceptionGroup):
            exc = BaseExceptionGroup("", [exc])

    at the top of their error handlers?  I'm leaning towards a rejected-ideas
    entry for this, and for flat_exceptions / split / subgroup on BaseException.


Backwards Compatibility
======================

We've identified the following potential compatibility concerns:

1. **User-defined methods**: Custom exception classes that already define 
   methods with these names would have their methods shadowed by the new 
   ones from ``BaseException``. This risk is considered minimal and acceptable, 
   as it's unlikely that many user exceptions define methods with these specific names.

   FIXME: github search to establish that!

2. **Custom flattening implementations**: Many libraries have custom implementations 
   of exception group flattening. These implementations will continue to work, 
   but may not preserve tracebacks as thoroughly as the new ``flat_exceptions()`` method. 
   Libraries can migrate to the standard method at their convenience.

No deprecation period is required as no existing functionality is being 
removed or changed. Code that doesn't use these new methods will continue 
to work exactly as before.


How to Teach This
================

FIXME: this Claude section is not good, rewrite it.
FIXME: discuss planned linter rules, with some analysis of false-alarm rates.

These new methods address common exception handling patterns and should be presented as helpful utilities that simplify error handling, especially when working with exception groups.

Documentation
-----------

The new methods should be documented in:

1. The Python Language Reference, under the "Exceptions" section
2. The Python Standard Library documentation for the ``exceptions`` module
3. The Python Tutorial sections on exception handling
4. PEP 654 documentation should be updated to reference these methods as common patterns

The documentation should include examples that clearly demonstrate the benefit of each method:

For ``flat_exceptions()``:

.. code-block:: python

    # Get all leaf exceptions with full tracebacks
    try:
        # Code that might raise an exception group
    except BaseExceptionGroup as eg:
        for exc in eg.flat_exceptions():
            print(f"Leaf exception: {exc}")

For ``preserve_context()``:

.. code-block:: python

    try:
        # Code that might raise an exception group
    except* Exception as eg:
        for exc in eg.flat_exceptions():
            if isinstance(exc, KeyError):
                # Re-raise without changing context
                with exc.preserve_context() as e:
                    raise e


Teaching Strategy
---------------

These methods should be taught using a layered approach:

1. **For beginners**: Introduce these as natural extensions to exception handling, without diving into the complexity they solve. Simple examples can show how they make code cleaner.

2. **For intermediate programmers**: Explain the problems they solve with before/after examples. Show how they eliminate common boilerplate code and prevent subtle bugs.

3. **For advanced programmers**: Discuss the implementation details, the traceback preservation approach, and how these methods solve real-world issues in production code.

When teaching all levels of programmers, highlight:

1. **Purpose**: Each method solves a specific pain point in exception handling.
   - ``flat_exceptions()``: Gets leaf exceptions while properly preserving traceback information
   - ``preserve_context()``: Re-raises an exception without altering its context chain
   - ``as_group()``: Provides uniform handling of regular exceptions and exception groups

2. **Common patterns**: Show how these methods replace common boilerplate code patterns.

3. **Real-world applications**: Demonstrate usage in async code, network operations, and parallel processing.

By making these methods part of the standard exception handling toolkit, we can encourage better error handling practices across the Python ecosystem, with proper traceback preservation and more maintainable code.



Rejected Ideas
=============

Add utility functions instead of methods
----------------------------------------

Rather than adding methods to exception classes, we could provide utility functions::

    def flat_exceptions(exc):
        if not isinstance(exc, BaseExceptionGroup):
            return [exc]
        # implementation

This approach was rejected for several reasons:  FIXME improve

1. **Discoverability**: Methods on exception objects are more discoverable than standalone functions. When working with an exception object, developers naturally explore its available methods.

2. **Namespace pollution**: Adding utility functions would require deciding where to put them—a new module would add import burden, while adding to existing modules would pollute their namespaces.

3. **Consistent API design**: Python generally favors methods on objects over utility functions when the functionality is closely tied to the object's type (e.g., ``dict.items()`` vs. hypothetical ``dict_items(d)``).




Footnotes
=========

.. [#catch-raw-group] 
    
    This remains very rare, and most cases duplicate logic across 
    ``except FooError:`` and ``except ExceptionGroup:  # containing FooError``
    clauses rather than using something like the as_group trick.

    FIXME: am I convinced that this will continue to be an issue as except*
    becomes more popular?  Maybe we should just advertise the recipe...




Copyright
========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license,
whichever is more permissive.
